--- SOURCE: https://catalog.tamusa.edu/undergraduate/student-resources-services/academic-resources/ ---

# Academic Resources
## Undergraduate Academic Advising
_CAB 202 & BLH 441 for College of Business advisors | (210) 784-1307_
Your academic advisor is here to help you develop an educational plan that supports your academic, personal, and career interests, while ensuring that you meet graduation requirements. Academic advisors help students make decisions by drawing upon their own educational experiences and their understanding of the curricula and academic policies of Texas A&M University-San Antonio.
Academic advisors are professional staff members. As each academic program has unique requirements, your assigned academic advisor is based on your major or, in the case of first-year college students, on your prior college experience. First-year college students are required to meet with their academic advisors prior to registering or making changes to their schedules. All students are strongly encouraged to meet with their academic advisors in their first semester and at least once per year for the remainder of their time at A&M-San Antonio. Meeting with your academic advisor will help you ensure you understand course sequencing and have a plan for graduation.
As the title of the role suggests, your advisor works with you in an advisory capacity. The decisions you make are yours and yours to own. Your advisor might suggest you to take one course of action over another, but in the end, your advisor honors your agency and your ability to make your own decisions.
We expect you to use DegreeWorks to track your progress toward graduation, and we strongly encourage you to meet with your academic advisor prior to the registration period for the upcoming semester. Ultimately, you are responsible for your final choices, and for ensuring that you fulfill the university degree requirements and the requirements of your major.
For information or to schedule an appointment with an undergraduate academic advisor, please call (210)784-1307, or visit the undergraduate academic advising website at: <https://www.tamusa.edu/student-resources/academic-affairs/undergraduate-academic-advising/>. Appointments can also be scheduled via the Civitas Inspire link in JagWire.
**First-Year Experience**
_Patriots’ Casa, Room 204 | (210)784-1435_
### First-Year Seminar (FYS)
Beginning in the 2020-21 catalog, First-Year Seminar, UNIV 1301, replaces Jaguar Tracks I, II, and III in all degrees. This course is designed to assist first-year students in adjusting to university expectations through enhancing quantitative reasoning skills and acquiring essential skills for academic success. 
For transfer students, UNIV 1301 may be waived if a student has completed at least 24 credits with a GPA of 2.0 or higher OR has successfully completed an equivalent 3-hour course with a grade of C or better. Examples of equivalent courses include EDUC 1300: Learning Framework or PSYC 1300: Learning Framework. BS Interdisciplinary Studies students who have transfer credit for EDUC 2301 should have that course applied to the UNIV 1301 requirement for compliance with field-of-study transfer.
For first-time-in-college students, UNIV 1301 is required to be taken within their first year. This course may be waived if a student has successfully completed an equivalent 3-hour course with a grade of C or better. Examples of equivalent courses include EDUC 1300: Learning Framework or PSYC 1300: Learning Framework. BS Interdisciplinary Studies students who have transfer credit for EDUC 2301 should have that course applied to the UNIV 1301 requirement for compliance with field-of-study transfer.
Effective Fall 2022, Jaguar Tracks I and II will no longer be offered.
### Peer Leaders 
Peer Leaders promote student engagement and foster an inclusive environment for students to find their sense of belonging to thrive on campus. Peer leaders are upperclassmen at A&M-SA who are passionate about working with a diverse group of students and committed to these students’ learning and development. They are high-achieving students and serve as a positive role model for students and assist them in navigating the academic, social, and personal challenges during their college journey. Mentees can expect to meet one-on-one or in small groups with their peer leader, attend on-campus activities and social events together.
### PROWL
Students participating in the PROWL program will 
  * Have access to a Peer Leader who will transition them into a career pathway through a connection to experiential learning opportunities;
  * Increase their wellness through connections to campus resources;
  * Create community and build relationships through social experiences on and off campus;
  * Be assisted in finishing out the first year and enrolling for their second year at the institution;
  * Learn to advocate for themselves to cultivate academic, professional, and personal growth.


### Learning Communities
Learning Communities (LCs) will strive to create a culture of learning to improve student success and to increase overall retention during the first year of the undergraduate experience. Students will have the opportunity to opt-into a semester-long learning community during registration at new student orientation. Cohorts of 20 students will be enrolled in same 2 to 4 courses during the semester. These linked courses will have a direct connection and shared assignments to encourage students to collaborate and master material by working together. The fundamental purpose of LCs at A&M-San Antonio will be to develop cohort identity, to establish a culture of learning and to create a sense of belonging to the university.
### **Common Experience**
The Common Experience at Texas A&M University-San Antonio is a yearlong initiative designed to cultivate a common intellectual conversation on a theme and facilitate increased interactions among faculty, staff, and students. It is a tradition that provides participants an opportunity to deconstruct and explore a common subject through multidisciplinary lenses and apply academic thought towards finding meaningful solutions to discovered challenges. Throughout the year, various events and programs will provide opportunities for engagement for the entire university community and beyond. 
### Jaguar JumpStart 
Jaguar JumpStart is a summer bridge program that helps students meet the Texas Success Initiative (TSI) assessment requirement before the fall semester. Completing the program saves time and money as students begin college. In summer 2025, students who are exempt or have passed the TSI for English/Language Arts and/or Math can start their college journey early. See below for more details.
**Academic Learning Center**
_Central Academic Building, Room 202 | (210)784-1307_
The ALC is committed to providing learning support for students with course-based tutoring and Supplemental Instruction. Tutoring appointments are available for currently enrolled students, and they can be scheduled via Brainfuse in Blackboard Tools or by calling the center. Supplemental Instruction Sessions are only open to students enrolled in a supported course. For more information, call (210) 784-1307, email _tutoring@tamusa.edu,_ or visit our . 
**Student Success Center**
## Student Success Center
_Student Success Center, Central Academic Building, room 202 | (210)784-1307_
The Student Success Center takes a proactive approach to help students complete their academic goals from orientation through graduation. The Center offers academic and skills workshops, one-on-one appointments, and online resources to help retention efforts at Texas A&M University-San Antonio. The goal of the Center is to help students discover, self-reflect, and become independent learners. The Success Center houses the Academic Success Coaches, the Testing Center, and the Academic Learning Center. Academic Success Coaches support students who are struggling academically. However, all students are encouraged to meet with an Academic Success Coach for assistance in navigating the University, to receive student resources, and help with the transitions from high school to college and/or from community college to the University. Academic Success Coaches partner with other offices on campus as well as faculty to ensure students are connected to the resources that are available on campus and in the community.
### Academic Recovery Program
The Academic Recovery Program is a student success program that houses a comprehensive academic success plan, including an academic information session, an online survey, and one-on-one meetings to track student progress. The Academic Recovery Program aims to enhance student learning, create opportunities for students to establish a record of academic successes, and provide individualized success plans developed in collaboration between the student and the Academic Success Coach. Each plan emphasizes the strengths of each learner and identifies areas needing improvement. 
### G.R.O.W.L Workshop Series (Gaining Resources and Opportunities While Learning Workshop Series)
The Student Success Center offers a series of sessions for all A&M-SA students to participate in. These sessions use the Wellness Wheel as the framework for the series. The Center takes a holistic approach with the G.R.O.W.L. Series touching on aspects of the Wellness Wheel from emotional intelligence, academic skills, healthy eating, and physical wellness. The Series supports students’ growth at any point in their development in college. Sessions are offered in person.
### Inspire
Inspire is a web-based tool to help connect students to campus resources in order to sustain retention and degree attainment. Students can utilize Inspire to schedule appointments with advisors and academic success coaches. An early alert system is incorporated into Inspire which faculty members can use to connect students with resources in the Student Success Center. Faculty may also submit progress reports to the Student Success Center in regards to student performance in a class. An early alert and progress report will result in contact from an Academic Success Coach to assist students in being successful at the University. Students can access Inspire through Jagwire in the Student Services tab.
**University Library**
_(210) 784-1500 |_  _<http://www.tamusa.edu/library>_
The University Library at Texas A&M University-San Antonio fosters collaboration among faculty, staff, and students to create an atmosphere of academic excellence and provides the university community with tools for lifelong learning. The library is actively engaged in the teaching, research, and outreach activities of A&M-SA. Library staff promote an inclusive culture through our services, resources, and support.
### Research Assistance and Instruction
The University Library’s professional librarians and staff offer you individualized research assistance and advanced research consultations in person, over the phone, by text message or e-mail, and via the web whenever the library is open. Working with faculty, the librarians also provide course-specific instruction to aid you in successfully completing course assignments involving research. You can access tutorials and subject-specific guides to resources on the library’s website.
### Information Resources
The University Library provides you with the information resources you need to be successful as a student. Most library materials are available in an electronic format, which you can access from any computer at any time. The onsite print and media collection consists of materials that directly relate to A&M-SA academic programs, course reserves, and K-12 curriculum support materials. If the library does not own a book, journal article, or other item that you need, you may request the library borrow it for you through ILLiad, the interlibrary loan service. A TexShare card provides you with borrowing privileges from more than 500 participating libraries across the state. For more information on the TexShare card, ask at the information desk.
### Library Facilities 
You have access to computers, printers, print and media collections, and open study space in the new library building. Hours are posted on the University Library’s website. You can reserve one of approximately 40 study rooms for yourself or a group from the library’s home page or via a QR code on an available study room’s door. Most study rooms are equipped with white boards and display panels for your laptop. If you need a break, you can borrow our private Reflection Room with a soft recliner and yoga mat available for your use. The library also has a family study room complete with toys for children. The library circulates laptops, headphones, calculators, and video cameras to students. You can create posters and other innovative projects for your classes in the library’s Innovation Lab. In addition, the library offers laminating services. A coffee shop sits right outside the library. Drinks with covered lids and cold snacks and foods are allowed in the library.
### Archives & Special Collections
[_http://www.tamusa.edu/archives_](http://www.tamusa.edu/library-archives)
The University Library’s Archives & Special Collections provides access to collections of enduring historical value that are relevant to the academic programs at A&M-SA. Researchers can find manuscript collections, photographs, maps, artwork, books, newspapers and more. Topics focus on San Antonio, South Texas, Mexican American Studies, borderlands, the military, and local political figures. Staff provide one-on-one research guidance to students, faculty, staff, and the general public. The hours for the Reading Room are listed on the library’s website.
Close this window
## Print Options
  * [Send Page to Printer](https://catalog.tamusa.edu/undergraduate/student-resources-services/academic-resources/)
Print this page.
  * [Download Page (PDF)](https://catalog.tamusa.edu/undergraduate/student-resources-services/academic-resources/academic-resources.pdf)
The PDF will include all information unique to this page.
  * [Download the 2025-2026 Catalog](https://catalog.tamusa.edu/pdf/2025-2026%20Full%20Catalog.pdf)
A PDF of the entire 2025-2026 Catalog.
  * [Download the 2025-2026 Undergraduate Catalog](https://catalog.tamusa.edu/pdf/2025-2026%20Undergraduate%20Catalog.pdf)
A PDF of the 2025-2026 Undergraduate Catalog.
  * [Download the 2025-2026 Graduate Catalog](https://catalog.tamusa.edu/pdf/2025-2026%20Graduate%20Catalog.pdf)
A PDF of the 2025-2026 Graduate Catalog.


